# clutch-baller
who will be clutch in next season?

Every sports enthusiast have had some type of argument about the sport they love with their friends. I also had my share of arguments and most of them were about NBA. In NBA one of the most hot topics is "who is the most clutch player?" A clutch player is someone who performs at high level when the stakes are high. These players are expected to deliver every time the game is on the line. In this project, I looked at the NBA play by play data fro each game from last 14 season to see who has been a clutch player in NBA in the past and predict who will be more clutch next season. The goal was to see which players should take more shots in closing moments of a close game. I defined the clutch moment being a game that is within 6 points with only two minutes to play in the fourth quarter.

First step was to do some EDA, feature engineering, and then get only the games that were clutch, within 6 points with two minutes to play. Then, I got stats for every player that played with in the clutch time. The next step was to see if there is any difference between regular game and the clutch time. To see the difference regular game and clutch time I compared the stats for all the players for these two different conditions. After comparing the player stats for both I found out that all the players are less efficient in last two minutes, in comparison to rest of the game.

After some more data engineering I came up with a clutch score for each player depending on how well they performed during that time. Then, by looking at the clutch score and other stats I labeled each player as clutch or not clutch. Out of all the players that played during clutch time, about 16% ended up being clutch. Next step was to predict who will be clutch next year by looking at the stats from previous year. For this, I made a classifier model using the XGBoost which looked at the most important features that determined if the player will be clutch or not.

In future, one thing we can look at is the defensive plays to determine how tough the shot was. We can look at the type of defensive scheme the shooter was going against. Some other things we can look at are whether the shot was wide-open or was it contested. Also, we can look if the shooter was double teamed or was the defense playing one on one. My data did not have any of this information so I was not able to include it in my project. Also, since defense is also an important part of the game, we can look at if a player is clutch on defense as in if they play better defense in the closing moments and if they make game changing blocks or steals to help their team win the game.
